PAGE 1
SYNOPSIS
We create Slither.io bots using neuroevolution of 
augmenting topologies (NEAT) and compare 
their performance to that of the best open 
source bot available online (high-performing 
expert system). With a ﬁtness function based on 
the ﬁnal size of the agent, our results show 
steady improvement in average score.
CONCLUSIONS
Regardless of being unable to match the score 
performance of Eskandary and Cailliau’s expert-system 
agent, our generated agents exhibited a variety of 
unique behaviors, reacting to other players in a manner 
similar to both human players and the expert-system 
agent, with no supervision.
REFERENCES
1. Ermiya Eskandary and Théophile Cailliau. 2016.  Slither.io Bot.   https://github.com/ErmiyaEskandary/Slither.io-bot
2. K00Klust. 2016.  Slither.io Bot Manager. https://github.com/K00sKlust/slither.io-bot-manager
3. K. O. Stanley, B. D. Bryant, and R. Miikkulainen. 2005. Real-time neuroevolution in the NERO video game. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation 9, 6 (Dec 2005), 653–668. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/TEVC.2005.856210
4. Kenneth O. Stanley and Risto Miikkulainen. 2002.  Evolving Neural Networks Through Augmenting Topologies. evolutionary Computation 10, 2 (2002), 99–127. http://nn.cs.utexas.edu/?stanley:ec02
5. Thomas Wagenaar. 2018. Neataptic.  https://wagenaartje.github.io/neataptic/
TOOLS
Neataptic [5]  |  Slither.io Agent Manager [2]
Slither.io agent by Eskandary [1]
SLITHER.IO NEAT SYSTEM
In order to run a neural-evolution for Slither.io, a system that could run web browser games 
headlessly (without rendering the game interface to a screen) for many days without 
intervention was necessary. It involved modifying the Slither.io agent Manager and integrating 
Neataptic to orchestrate our neuroevolution, along with modifying Eskandary and Cailliau’s 
Slither.io agent to be a shell that accepts a neural network as its decision-making brain.
NEUROEVOLUTION
This method was ﬁrst developed by Kenneth O. 
Stanley and Risto Miikkulainen in 2002 to pose a 
solution to control and sequential decision tasks [4]. 
The evolutionary structure of NEAT works by 
altering the associated networks’ node and 
connection layout from generation to generation; 
this greatly expands the search space of traits in the 
artiﬁcial neural network (ANN).
Evolving Unsupervised Neural 
Networks for Slither.io
Mitchell Miller, Megan Washburn, and Foaad Khosmood
California Polytechnic State University, Department of Computer Science and Software Engineering
PRIOR WORK
The implementation of rtNEAT (real-time 
NEAT) in NeuroEvolvingRobotic Operatives 
(NERO) improved the performance and 
engagement of AI agents by learning from 
players and allowing the agents to develop 
original behavior [3]. 
N E A T A P T I C
PARAMETER ADJUSTMENT
We chose three different sets of parameters to see 
how the ﬁtness of the genomes progressed after 
100 generations of running our neuroevolution. See 
Table 1 for the difference in each runs parameters. 
All other parameters were held constant. 
DESIGN AND EXPERIMENT
We observed two main attributes when running our neuroevolutionfor Slither.io. Primarily, we 
focused on the resulting scores of our generated agent to compare with with Eskandary and 
Cailliau’sexpert-system agent. Secondly, we looked at the performance of our neuralevolution 
given different parameters. Additionally, we focused on what parameter adjustments would 
improve the speed of our neuroevolution.
LEADERBOARD:
Figure 1: Boxplot of each 
population’s ﬁtness after running 
100 generations for Run 1.
Figure 2: Boxplot of each 
population’s ﬁtness after running 
100 generations for Run 2.
Figure 3: Boxplot of each population’s ﬁtness after running 100 
generations for Run 3.
